docs: add document for failover and failback (#8411)
rook/rook: Documentation/async-disaster-recovery.md

 sends a GRPC request down to the driver to forcefully mark the dataSource as `primary`
 on the Secondary Site.

* If you are manually creating the PVC and PV on the secondary cluster, remove
 the claimRef section in the PV objects. (See [this](async-disaster-recovery.md#restore-the-backup-on-cluster-2) for details)
* Create the storageclass, PVC, and PV objects on the secondary site.
* As you are creating the static binding between PVC and PV, a new PV won’t be
 created here, the PVC will get bind to the existing PV.
* [Create the VolumeReplicationClass](rbd-mirroring.md#create-a-volume-replication-class-cr) and [VolumeReplication CR](rbd-mirroring.md#create-a-volumereplication-cr) on the secondary site.
* [Check VolumeReplication CR status](rbd-mirroring.md#checking-replication-status) to verify if the image is marked `primary` on the secondary site.
* Once the Image is marked as `primary`, the PVC is now ready to be used. Now,
 we can scale up the applications to use the PVC.

### Failback (post-disaster recovery)

Once the failed cluster is recovered on the primary site and you want to failback
 from secondary site, follow the below steps:

> * Scale down the running applications(if any) on the primary site.

Reviewer: Please check all the places with parenthesis since they should really have a space between the words like this
```suggestion
* Scale down the running applications (if any) on the primary site.
```

 Ensure that all persistent volumes in use by the workload are no
 longer in use on the primary cluster.
* [Update VolumeReplication CR](rbd-mirroring.md#create-a-volumereplication-cr) replicationState
 from `primary` to `secondary` on the primary site.
* Scale down the applications on the secondary site.
* [Update VolumeReplication CR](rbd-mirroring.md#create-a-volumereplication-cr) replicationState state from `primary` to
 `secondary` in secondary site.
* On the primary site, [verify the VolumeReplication status](rbd-mirroring.md#checking-replication-status) is marked as
 volume ready to use.
* Once the volume is marked to ready to use, change the replicationState state
 from `secondary` to `primary` in primary site.
* Scale up the applications again on the primary site.

> ## Appendix

Reviewer: Why is backup & restore in an appendix? Shouldn't backup & restore be a 2nd-level heading?

### Backup & Restore

Here, we take a backup of PVC and PV object on one site, so that they can be restored later to the peer cluster.

#### **Take backup on cluster-1**

* Take backup of the PVC `rbd-pvc`

```bash
kubectl --context=cluster-1 get pvc rbd-pvc -oyaml > pvc-backup.yaml
```

* Take a backup of the PV, corresponding to the PVC

```bash
kubectl --context=cluster-1 get pv/pvc-65dc0aac-5e15-4474-90f4-7a3532c621ec -oyaml > pv_backup.yaml
```

>:bulb: We can also take backup using external tools like **Velero**.

> > Refer [velero documentation](https://velero.io/docs/main/) for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> See [velero documentation](https://velero.io/docs/main/) for more information.
```

#### **Restore the backup on cluster-2**

* Create storageclass on the secondary cluster

```bash
kubectl create -f examples/rbd/storageclass.yaml --context=cluster-2
```

> ```bash

> > storageclass.storage.k8s.io/csi-rbd-sc created

Reviewer: not needed

> ```

* Create VolumeReplicationClass on the secondary cluster

```bash

> cat <<EOF | kubectl --context=cluster-2 apply -f -

Reviewer: examples yaml? 
```suggestion
```

apiVersion: replication.storage.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: VolumeReplicationClass
metadata:
  name: rbd-volumereplicationclass
spec:
  provisioner: rook-ceph.rbd.csi.ceph.com
  parameters:
    mirroringMode: snapshot
    replication.storage.openshift.io/replication-secret-name: rook-csi-rbd-provisioner
    replication.storage.openshift.io/replication-secret-namespace: rook-ceph
EOF
 ```

> ```bash
> volumereplicationclass.replication.storage.openshift.io/rbd-volumereplicationclass created
> ```

* If Persistent Volumes and Claims are created manually on the secondary cluster,
     remove the `claimRef` on the backed up PV objects in yaml files; so that the
     PV can get bound to the new claim on the secondary cluster.

```yaml
...
spec:
  accessModes:
  - ReadWriteOnce
  capacity:
    storage: 1Gi
  claimRef:
    apiVersion: v1
    kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
    name: rbd-pvc
    namespace: default
    resourceVersion: "64252"
    uid: 65dc0aac-5e15-4474-90f4-7a3532c621ec
  csi:
...
```

* Apply the Persistent Volume backup from the primary cluster

```bash
kubectl create -f pv-backup.yaml --context=cluster-2
```

> ```bash

> > persistentvolume/pvc-65dc0aac-5e15-4474-90f4-7a3532c621ec created

Reviewer: not needed

> ```

* Apply the Persistent Volume claim from the restored backup

```bash
kubectl create -f pvc-backup.yaml --context=cluster-2
```

> ```bash

> > persistentvolumeclaim/rbd-pvc created

Reviewer: not needed

---

> title: Async DR Failover and Failback

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: Async Disaster Recovery Failover and Failback
```

> title: Async Disaster Recovery Failover and Failback

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: Asynchronous Disaster Recovery Failover and Failback
```

Reviewer 3: Suggestion:  `Asynchronous Disaster Recovery: Failover and Failback`

Reviewer 3: ignore my above comment.

weight: 3245
indent: true
---

# RBD Asynchronous Disaster Recovery Failover and Failback

## Table of Contents <!-- omit in toc -->

* [Planned Migration](#planned-migration)

>   * [Failover](#failover)

Author: Thanks for the suggestion! Updated.

* [Disaster Recovery](#disaster-recovery)
  * [Failover](#failover-abrupt-shutdown)
  * [Failback](#failback-post-disaster-recovery)
* [Appendix](#appendix)
  * [Creating a VolumeReplicationClass CR](#create-a-volume-replication-class-cr)
  * [Creating a VolumeReplications CR](#create-a-volumereplication-cr)
  * [Check VolumeReplication CR status](async-disaster-recovery.md#checking-replication-status)
  * [Backup and Restore](#backup-&-restore)

## Planned Migration

> Use cases: Datacenter maintenance, technology refresh, disaster avoidance, etc.

### Failover

The failover operation is the process of switching production to a
 backup facility (normally your recovery site). In the case of Failover,
 access to the image on the primary site should be stopped.
The image should now be made *primary* on the secondary cluster so that
 the access can be resumed there.

> :memo: As mentioned in the pre-requisites, periodic or one time backup of
> the application should be available for restore on the secondary site (cluster-2).

Follow the below steps for planned migration of workload from primary
 cluster to secondary cluster:

* Scale down all the application pods which are using the

>  mirrored PVC on the Primary Cluster.

Reviewer 4: Add reference to how PVC or image is enabled for mirroring.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion! Added a [new section](https://github.com/rook/rook/pull/8411/files#diff-e1e52c786ed334c193c928332d3ab3af038df4029d9dae9647ae93d6725160b6R260) for the same in the rbd mirroring guide and also gave the user a pointer in failover and failback doc [here](https://github.com/rook/rook/pull/8411/files#diff-1b0b287cce986a56c15d68e1b16ad5941350b0fee93c11ff1de7c6d829456b05R20). Let me know if I am missing anything else.

 to be used. Now, we can scale up the applications to use the PVC.

>:memo: **WARNING**: In Async Disaster recovery use case, we don't get
> the complete data.
> We will only get the crash-consistent data based on the snapshot interval time.

### Failback

A failback operation is a process of returning production to its
 original location after a disaster or a scheduled maintenance period.
 For a migration during steady state operation, a failback uses the
 same process as failover by just switching the clusters.

>:memo: **Remember**: We can skip the backup-restore operations
> in case of failback if the required yamls are already present on
> the primary cluster. Any new PVCs will still need to be restored on the
> primary site.

## Disaster Recovery

> Use cases: Natural disasters, Power failures, System failures, and crashes, etc.

### Failover (abrupt shutdown)

In case of Disaster recovery, create VolumeReplication CR at the Secondary Site.
 Since the connection to the Primary Site is lost, the operator automatically
 sends a GRPC request down to the driver to forcefully mark the dataSource as `primary`
 on the Secondary Site.

> * If you are manually creating the PVC and PV on the secondary cluster, remove

Reviewer 2: Should we link `(See [this](async-disaster-recovery.md#restore-the-backup-on-cluster-2) for details` just like we did above?

 from `primary` to `secondary` on the primary site.
* Scale down the applications on the secondary site.
* [Update VolumeReplication CR](async-disaster-recovery.md#create-a-volumereplication-cr) replicationState state from `primary` to
 `secondary` in secondary site.
* On the primary site, [verify the VolumeReplication status](async-disaster-recovery.md#checking-replication-status) is marked as
 volume ready to use.
* Once the volume is marked to ready to use, change the replicationState state
 from `secondary` to `primary` in primary site.
* Scale up the applications again on the primary site.

## Appendix

Below guide assumes that we have a PVC (rbd-pvc) in BOUND state; created using
 *StorageClass* with `Retain` reclaimPolicy.

```bash
kubectl get pvc --context=cluster-1
```

>
> ```bash
> NAME      STATUS   VOLUME                                     CAPACITY   ACCESS MODES   STORAGECLASS      AGE
> rbd-pvc   Bound    pvc-65dc0aac-5e15-4474-90f4-7a3532c621ec   1Gi        RWO            csi-rbd-sc   44s
> ```

### Create a Volume Replication Class CR

In this case, we create a Volume Replication Class on cluster-1 ()

>   ```yaml

Reviewer 2: wrong indent

>     $cat <<EOF | kubectl --context=cluster-1 apply -f -

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    cat <<EOF | kubectl --context=cluster-1 apply -f -
```

>   cat <<EOF | kubectl --context=cluster-1 apply -f -

Reviewer 2: wrong indent

    apiVersion: replication.storage.openshift.io/v1alpha1
    kind: VolumeReplicationClass
    metadata:
      name: rbd-volumereplicationclass
    spec:
      provisioner: rook-ceph.rbd.csi.ceph.com
      parameters:
        mirroringMode: snapshot
        schedulingInterval: "12m"
        schedulingStartTime: "16:18:43"
        replication.storage.openshift.io/replication-secret-name: rook-csi-rbd-provisioner
        replication.storage.openshift.io/replication-secret-namespace: rook-ceph
    EOF
  ```

>:bulb: **Note:** The `schedulingInterval` can be specified in formats of
> minutes, hours or days using suffix `m`,`h` and `d` respectively.
> The optional schedulingStartTime can be specified using the ISO 8601
> time format.

### Create a VolumeReplication CR

* Once VolumeReplicationClass is created, create a Volume Replication for
 the PVC which we intend to replicate to secondary cluster.

>     ```yaml

Reviewer 2: wrong indent

>   cat <<EOF | kubectl --context=cluster-1 apply -f -

Reviewer 2: wrong indent

>     $cat <<EOF | kubectl --context=cluster-1 apply -f -

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    cat <<EOF | kubectl --context=cluster-1 apply -f -
```

To check VolumeReplication CR status:

```bash
kubectl get volumereplication pvc-volumereplication  --context=cluster-1 -oyaml
```

>```yaml
>...
>spec:
>  dataSource:
>    apiGroup: ""
>    kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
>    name: rbd-pvc
>  replicationState: primary
>  volumeReplicationClass: rbd-volumereplicationclass
>status:
>  conditions:
>  - lastTransitionTime: "2021-05-04T07:39:00Z"
>    message: ""
>    observedGeneration: 1
>    reason: Promoted
>    status: "True"
>    type: Completed
>  - lastTransitionTime: "2021-05-04T07:39:00Z"
>    message: ""
>    observedGeneration: 1
>    reason: Healthy
>    status: "False"
>    type: Degraded
>  - lastTransitionTime: "2021-05-04T07:39:00Z"
>    message: ""
>    observedGeneration: 1
>    reason: NotResyncing
>    status: "False"
>    type: Resyncing
>  lastCompletionTime: "2021-05-04T07:39:00Z"
>  lastStartTime: "2021-05-04T07:38:59Z"
>  message: volume is marked primary
>  observedGeneration: 1
>  state: Primary
>```

### Backup & Restore

Here, we take a backup of PVC and PV object on one site, so that they can be restored later to the peer cluster.

#### Take backup on cluster-1

* Take backup of the PVC `rbd-pvc`

>   ```bash

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```bash
```

  kubectl --context=cluster-1 get pvc rbd-pvc -oyaml >pvc-backup.yaml
  ```

* Take a backup of the PV, corresponding to the PVC

>   ```bash

Reviewer 2: wrong indent

>   kubectl --context=cluster-1 get pv/pvc-65dc0aac-5e15-4474-90f4-7a3532c621ec -oyaml >pv_backup.yaml

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  kubectl --context=cluster-1 get pv/pvc-65dc0aac-5e15-4474-90f4-7a3532c621ec -oyaml > pv_backup.yaml
```

  ```

>   >:bulb: We can also take backup using external tools like **Velero**.

Reviewer 2: wrong indent

  > Refer [velero documentation](https://velero.io/docs/main/) for more information.

#### Restore the backup on cluster-2

* Create storageclass on the secondary cluster

>   ```bash

Reviewer 2: wrong indent

>  kubectl create -f examples/rbd/storageclass.yaml --context=cluster-2

Reviewer 2: wrong indent

  ```

>   > ```bash

Reviewer 2: wrong indent

> storageclass.storage.k8s.io/csi-rbd-sc created
> ```

* Create VolumeReplicationClass on the secondary cluster

```bash

>   cat <<EOF | kubectl --context=cluster-2 apply -f -

Reviewer 2: wrong indent

>   ```bash

Reviewer 2: wrong indent

    apiVersion: replication.storage.openshift.io/v1alpha1
    kind: VolumeReplicationClass
    metadata:
      name: rbd-volumereplicationclass
    spec:
      provisioner: rook-ceph.rbd.csi.ceph.com
      parameters:
        mirroringMode: snapshot
        replication.storage.openshift.io/replication-secret-name: rook-csi-rbd-provisioner
        replication.storage.openshift.io/replication-secret-namespace: rook-ceph
    EOF
  ```

  > ```bash

>   > volumereplicationclass.replication.storage.openshift.io/rbd-volumereplicationclass created

Reviewer 2: wrong indent

> ```

* If Persistent Volumes and Claims are created manually on the secondary cluster,
     remove the `claimRef` on the backed up PV objects in yaml files; so that the
     PV can get bound to the new claim on the secondary cluster.

```yaml
...
spec:

>     accessModes:

Reviewer 2: wrong indent

>   spec:

Reviewer 2: wrong indent

      - ReadWriteOnce
      capacity:
        storage: 1Gi
      claimRef:
        apiVersion: v1
        kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
        name: rbd-pvc
        namespace: default
        resourceVersion: "64252"
        uid: 65dc0aac-5e15-4474-90f4-7a3532c621ec
      csi:
  ...
```

* Apply the Persistent Volume backup from the primary cluster

```bash

>     kubectl create -f pv-backup.yaml --context=cluster-2

Reviewer 2: wrong indent

```

> ```bash
> persistentvolume/pvc-65dc0aac-5e15-4474-90f4-7a3532c621ec created
> ```

* Apply the Persistent Volume claim from the restored backup

```bash

>     kubectl create -f pvc-backup.yaml --context=cluster-2

Reviewer 2: wrong indent

```

> ```bash
> persistentvolumeclaim/rbd-pvc created
> ```

```bash

>   kubectl get pvc --context=cluster-2

Reviewer 2: wrong indent

> # Failover and Failback In RBD Async Disaster Recovery

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# Failover and Failback in RBD Async Disaster Recovery
```

[RBD mirroring](https://docs.ceph.com/en/latest/rbd/rbd-mirroring/)
 is an asynchronous replication of RBD images between multiple Ceph clusters.
 This capability is available in two modes:

* Journal-based: Every write to the RBD image is first recorded
 to the associated journal before modifying the actual image.
 The remote cluster will read from this associated journal and
 replay the updates to its local image.
* Snapshot-based: This mode uses periodically scheduled or
 manually created RBD image mirror-snapshots to replicate
 crash-consistent RBD images between clusters.

## Create RBD Pools

In this section we create specific rbd pools that are RBD mirroring
 enabled for use with the DR use case.

> :memo: **Note:** It is also feasible to edit existing pools and
> enable them for replication.

Execute the following steps on each peer cluster to create mirror
 enabled pools:

> * Create a RBD pool that is mirroring enabled, adding the section

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Create a RBD pool that is mirroring enabled by adding the section
```

 spec.mirroring in the CephBlockPool CR, example:

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: ceph.rook.io/v1
    kind: CephBlockPool
    metadata:
      name: replicapool
      namespace: rook-ceph
    spec:
      replicated:
        size: 1
      mirroring:
        enabled: true
        mode: image
        # schedule(s) of snapshot
        snapshotSchedules:
          - interval: 24h # daily snapshots
            startTime: 14:00:00-05:00
    ```

* Creating `replicapool` pool on the cluster:

    ```bash
    kubectl apply -f pool.yaml -n rook-ceph
    ```

   > ```bash
   > cephblockpool.ceph.rook.io/replicapool created
   > ```

* Repeat the steps on the peer cluster.

> :memo: WARNING: Pool name across the cluster peers should be the same
> for RBD replication to function.

> For more information on CephBlockPool CR, please refer to the [ceph-pool-crd documentation](https://github.com/rook/rook/blob/master/Documentation/ceph-pool-crd.md#mirroring).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For more information on CephBlockPool CR, please refer to the [ceph-pool-crd documentation](Documentation/ceph-pool-crd.md#mirroring).
```

 specification and can be used by any storage provider.

Volume Replication Operator follows controller pattern and provides
 extended APIs for storage disaster recovery.
 The extended APIs are provided via Custom Resource Definition (CRD).

 Rook v1.6.0 comes with the new volume replication support, and
 this can be enabled in the `rook-ceph-operator-config` configmap.

>:bulb: For more information, please refer to the
> [volume-replication-operator](https://github.com/csi-addons/volume-replication-operator).

### Deploy `csi-omap-generator` and `volume-replication` sidecars

To achieve RBD Mirroring, `csi-omap-generator` and `volume-replication`
 containers need to be deployed in the RBD provisioner pods.
Execute the following steps on each peer cluster to enable the
 OMap generator and Volume Replication sidecars:

* Edit the `rook-ceph-operator-config` configmap and add the
 following configurations

    ```bash
    kubectl edit cm rook-ceph-operator-config  -nrook-ceph
    ```

    Add the following configuration if not present

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: v1
    data:
      CSI_ENABLE_OMAP_GENERATOR: "true"
      CSI_ENABLE_VOLUME_REPLICATION: "true"
    ```

> * After successful execution of the above steps, a new sidecars

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* After successful execution of the above steps, two new sidecars
```
?

 *StorageClass* with `Retain` reclaimPolicy.

```bash
kubectl get pvc --context=cluster-1
```

>
> ```bash
> NAME      STATUS   VOLUME                                     CAPACITY   ACCESS MODES   STORAGECLASS      AGE
> rbd-pvc   Bound    pvc-65dc0aac-5e15-4474-90f4-7a3532c621ec   1Gi        RWO            csi-rbd-sc   44s
> ```

* Create Volume Replication Class on cluster-1

    ```yaml
    $cat <<EOF | kubectl --context=cluster1 apply -f -
    apiVersion: replication.storage.openshift.io/v1alpha1
    kind: VolumeReplicationClass
    metadata:
      name: rbd-volumereplicationclass
    spec:
      provisioner: rook-ceph.rbd.csi.ceph.com
      parameters:
        mirroringMode: snapshot
        schedulingInterval: "12m"
        schedulingStartTime: "16:18:43"
        replication.storage.openshift.io/replication-secret-name: rook-csi-rbd-provisioner
        replication.storage.openshift.io/replication-secret-namespace: rook-ceph
    EOF
    ```

>:bulb: **Note:** The `schedulingInterval` can be specified in formats of
> minutes, hours or days using suffix `m`,`h` and `d` respectively.
> The optional schedulingStartTime can be specified using the ISO 8601
> time format.

> * Once VolumeReplicationClass is created,create a Volume Replication for

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Once VolumeReplicationClass is created, create a Volume Replication for
```

 the PVC which we intend to replicate to secondary cluster.

    ```yaml
    $cat <<EOF | kubectl --context=cluster-1 apply -f -
    apiVersion: replication.storage.openshift.io/v1alpha1
    kind: VolumeReplication
    metadata:
      name: pvc-volumereplication
    spec:
      volumeReplicationClass: rbd-volumereplicationclass
      replicationState: primary
      dataSource:
        apiGroup: ""
        kind: PersistentVolumeClaim

>         name: rbd-pvc # Name of the PVC to which mirroring to be enabled.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        name: rbd-pvc # Name of the PVC on which mirroring is to be enabled.
```

     PV can get bound to the new claim on the secondary cluster.

  ```yaml
    ...
    spec:
        accessModes:
        - ReadWriteOnce
        capacity:
          storage: 1Gi
        claimRef:
          apiVersion: v1
          kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
          name: rbd-pvc
          namespace: default
          resourceVersion: "64252"
          uid: 65dc0aac-5e15-4474-90f4-7a3532c621ec
        csi:
    ...
  ```

* Apply the Persistent Volume backup from the primary cluster

```bash
    kubectl create -f pv-backup.yaml --context=cluster-2
```

> ```bash
> persistentvolume/pvc-65dc0aac-5e15-4474-90f4-7a3532c621ec created
> ```

* Apply the Persistent Volume claim from the restored backup

```bash
    kubectl create -f pvc-backup.yaml --context=cluster-2
```

> ```bash
> persistentvolumeclaim/rbd-pvc created
> ```

```bash
  kubectl get pvc --context=cluster-2
```

> ```bash
> NAME      STATUS   VOLUME                                     CAPACITY   ACCESS MODES   STORAGECLASS      AGE
> rbd-pvc   Bound    pvc-65dc0aac-5e15-4474-90f4-7a3532c621ec   1Gi        RWO            csi-rbd-sc   44s
> ```

## Planned Migration

> > Use cases: Datacenter maintenance, Technology refresh, Disaster avoidance, etc.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> Use cases: Datacenter maintenance, technology refresh, disaster avoidance, etc.
```

### Failover

The failover operation is the process of switching production to a
 backup facility (normally your recovery site). In the case of Failover,
 access to the image on the primary site should be stopped.
The image should now be made *primary* on the secondary cluster so that
 the access can be resumed there.

:memo: As mentioned in the pre-requisites, periodic or one time backup of
 the application should be available for restore on the secondary site (cluster-b).

Follow the below steps for planned migration of workload from primary
 cluster to secondary cluster:

> 

Reviewer 3: IMO, we should provide `kubectl` commands for the steps mentioned below, where ever possible.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion! Although adding `kubectl` commands for every step will be more descriptive, but it will come with the downside of unnecessarily repeating the redundant steps. 
For e.g: Updating the VolumeReplication CR is a highly repetitive operation throughout the failover and failback steps, which we have already mentioned above how to do [here](https://github.com/rook/rook/pull/8411/files#diff-1b0b287cce986a56c15d68e1b16ad5941350b0fee93c11ff1de7c6d829456b05R192). 
Similarly, descriptions of steps to do all the other operations in failover and failback are already mentioned on the doc before coming to the `failover and failback steps` section. 
Thus, I think it will be better if we keep it descriptive and concise at the same time. 
Thoughts? @Madhu-1 @sp98 @leseb @travisn

Reviewer: If we're not going to provide the commands, we should refer back to some earlier section where commands were provided. So hopefully we can avoid duplicating common steps, but still show the commands.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion! Now each step refers to the section where commands are provided.

  driver via GRPC request to mark the dataSource as `secondary`.
* If you are manually recreating the PVC and PV on the secondary cluster,
 remove the `claimRef` section in the PV objects.
* Recreate the storageclass, PVC, and PV objects on the secondary site.
* As you are creating the static binding between PVC and PV, a new PV won’t
 be created here, the PVC will get bind to the existing PV.
* Create the VolumeReplicationClass on the secondary site.
* Create the VolumeReplications for all the PVC’s for which mirroring
 is enabled
  * `replicationState` should be `primary` for all the PVC’s on
   the secondary site.
* Check whether the image is marked `primary` on the secondary site
 by verifying it in VolumeReplication CR status.
* Once the Image is marked as `primary`, the PVC is now ready
 to be used. Now, we can scale up the applications to use the PVC.

>:memo: **WARNING**: In Async Disaster recovery use case, we don't get
> the complete data.
> We will only get the crash-consistent data based on the snapshot interval time.

### Failback

To perform a failback operation to primary cluster in case of planned migration

> , just repeat the Failback steps in vice-versa.

Reviewer 3: We should give the steps (with `kubectl` commands)  rather than expecting users to follow the vice-versa steps.  This is just my opinion.

>:memo: **Remember**: We can skip the backup-restore operations
> in case of failback if the required yamls are already present on
> the primary cluster. Any new PVCs will still need to be restored on the
> primary site.

## Disaster Recovery

> Use cases: Natural disasters, Power failures, System failures, and crashes, etc.

### Failover (abrupt shutdown)

In case of Disaster recovery, create VolumeReplication CR at the Secondary Site.
 Since the connection to the Primary Site is lost, the operator automatically

>   sends a GRPC request down to the driver to forcefully mark the dataSource as `primary`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  sends a GRPC request down to the driver to forcefully mark the dataSource on the Secondary Site  as `primary`.
```
?

* Create the storageclass, PVC, and PV objects on the secondary site.
* As you are creating the static binding between PVC and PV, a new PV won’t be
 created here, the PVC will get bind to the existing PV.
* Create the VolumeReplicationClass and VolumeReplication CR on the secondary site.
* Check whether the image is `primary` on secondary site, by verifying in
 the VolumeReplication CR status.
* Once the Image is marked as `primary`, the PVC is now ready to be used. Now,
 we can scale up the applications to use the PVC.

### Failback (post-disaster recovery)

Once the failed cluster is recovered on the primary site and you want to failback
 from secondary site, follow the below steps:

* Update the VolumeReplication CR replicationState
 from `primary` to `secondary` on the primary site.
* Scale down the applications on the secondary site.
* Update the VolumeReplication CR replicationState state from `primary` to
 `secondary` in secondary site.
* On the primary site, verify that the VolumeReplication status is marked as
 volume ready to use
* Once the volume is marked to ready to use, change the replicationState state
 from `secondary` to `primary` in primary site.

> * Scale up the applications again on the primary site.

Reviewer 3: This step could be confusing as user never scaled down the application in the `primary` site which was down due to a disaster.

Author: Good catch! Added a step to scale down the applications on the primary cluster, and make sure that all the PVCs in workload are no longer in use.

> # Failover and Failback in RBD Async Disaster Recovery

Reviewer: All the documentation files need a header such as this. The title is for the table of contents (and should be short), and the weight depends on where it should should up in the table of contents. What if we add it after the snapshots topic and before the volume cloning topic? In that case, we could set this to 3240, change snapshots to 3230, and leave volume cloning at 3250. 
```
---
title: Async DR Failover
weight: 3240
indent: true
---
```

> # Failover and Failback in RBD Async Disaster Recovery

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# RBD Async Disaster Recovery Failover and Failback
```

> [RBD mirroring](https://docs.ceph.com/en/latest/rbd/rbd-mirroring/)

Reviewer: RBD Mirroring is an extremely complicated feature and books could be written on it. So the goal of our docs in Rook is to make it as concise and clear as possible for users to follow, and provide links to more details if they want to understand more deeply. How we present the docs will really make a difference for whether the feature will be used, so it is important to spend time organizing and clarifying the docs. Since so much time is invested in implementing the feature, we need to invest time in the docs by multiple members of the team, and testing the instructions to make sure everything works end-to-end. 

Some more specific suggestions:
- We really need to break this down into multiple docs, it is just too complicated for a single doc. One doc would be an overview, then perhaps separate docs for initial configuration of the clusters, configuration of pools, then a doc for steps to failover/failback. We may want to make the overview page a top-level topic (similar to [Ceph Tools](https://rook.github.io/docs/rook/v1.7/ceph-tools.html)) with multiple subtopics).
- The docs need an overview section at the top of the doc that explain what the user will accomplish in that doc
- Longer docs could use a table of contents with links to each section in the doc, see [this example](https://rook.github.io/docs/rook/v1.7/ceph-common-issues.html#table-of-contents-)

At the end of the day, a non-rbd-replication-expert (including me) should be able to follow the docs and get everything working. I do best with simple features, so let's see how to simplify as much as possible. :)

Author: Sure, breaking it down into multiple docs, with each doc covering certain aspects seems good to me. As we can then take the liberty of being descriptive at places as we have multiple docs with each doc focused on a part.

1. Initial doc can shed some light on the Overview.
2. Second doc can cover the Disaster recovery description and how we can set up DR with rook.
3. Lastly, in the third doc, we can cover all the failover and failback steps for Planned migration and DR use cases.

Thoughts?

Reviewer: Yes sounds good. For 2 and 3 we could also consider multiple docs for each one if needed, but maybe not. Let's see how it looks with just the 3 docs to start.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion. Now we have 3 separate docs for the same. One added benefit of the overview doc is that, once we have a doc for failover and failback steps for Metro DR, we can link it in the Overview doc as well :)

 is an asynchronous replication of RBD images between multiple Ceph clusters.
 This capability is available in two modes:

* Journal-based: Every write to the RBD image is first recorded
 to the associated journal before modifying the actual image.
 The remote cluster will read from this associated journal and
 replay the updates to its local image.
* Snapshot-based: This mode uses periodically scheduled or
 manually created RBD image mirror-snapshots to replicate
 crash-consistent RBD images between clusters.

## Create RBD Pools

In this section we create specific rbd pools that are RBD mirroring
 enabled for use with the DR use case.

> :memo: **Note:** It is also feasible to edit existing pools and
> enable them for replication.

Execute the following steps on each peer cluster to create mirror
 enabled pools:

> * Create a RBD pool that is mirroring enabled by adding the section

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Create an RBD pool that is enabled for mirroring by adding the section
```

>  spec.mirroring in the CephBlockPool CR, example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 spec.mirroring in the CephBlockPool CR:
```

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: ceph.rook.io/v1
    kind: CephBlockPool
    metadata:

>       name: replicapool

Reviewer: How about we create a pool-mirrored.yaml in the examples folder and name it like this? We try to follow this pattern of yaml files in the examples folder for all doc examples.
```suggestion
      name: mirroredpool
```

Author: Sure, will add that.

      namespace: rook-ceph
    spec:
      replicated:
        size: 1
      mirroring:
        enabled: true
        mode: image
        # schedule(s) of snapshot
        snapshotSchedules:
          - interval: 24h # daily snapshots

>             startTime: 14:00:00-05:00

Reviewer: Do we expect UTC format? Or they can use any format that parses with a `time.Parse()`?

    ```

> * Creating `replicapool` pool on the cluster:

Reviewer: No need for this bullet, it's already clear IMO with the `kubectl create` command, which is just part of the whole example.

    ```bash

>     kubectl apply -f pool.yaml -n rook-ceph

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    kubectl create -f pool.yaml
```

    ```

   > ```bash
   > cephblockpool.ceph.rook.io/replicapool created
   > ```

* Repeat the steps on the peer cluster.

> :memo: WARNING: Pool name across the cluster peers should be the same
> for RBD replication to function.

For more information on CephBlockPool CR, please refer to the [ceph-pool-crd documentation](Documentation/ceph-pool-crd.md#mirroring).

## Bootstrap Peers

In order for the rbd-mirror daemon to discover its peer cluster, the
 peer must be registered and a user account must be created. The following

>  steps enable bootstrapping peers to discover and authenticate to each other.

Reviewer: Where are these steps?

For more details, refer to the official rbd mirror documentation on
 [how to create a bootstrap peer](https://docs.ceph.com/en/latest/rbd/rbd-mirroring/#bootstrap-peers).

> ## Create RBDMirror CRD

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Configure the RBDMirror Daemon
```

Replication is handled by the rbd-mirror daemon. The rbd-mirror daemon
 is responsible for pulling image updates from the remote, peer cluster,
 and applying them to image within the local cluster.

Creation of the rbd-mirror daemon(s) is done through the custom resource
 definitions (CRDs).

>  For more information on how to set up Ceph RBDMirror CRD, refer to

Reviewer: We need an example in this doc that shows creating the rbdmirror CR, then for more details about the settings they can link to that doc.

Author: Sure, will add an example for the same.

 [rook documentation](https://rook.io/docs/rook/master/ceph-rbd-mirror-crd.html).

> ## Enable OMAP Generator and Volume Replication

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Enable CSI Replication Sidecars
```

> ### OMap Generator

Reviewer: IMO this doc does not need to explain details about the sidecars. We just need to tell them to enable the sidecars. So I think you could delete lines 88 - 111, and just focus on the operator settings they need to enable.

 is needed to preserve PVC to storage mappings.

### Volume Replication

Volume Replication Operator is a kubernetes operator that provides common
 and reusable APIs for storage disaster recovery.
 It is based on [csi-addons/spec](https://github.com/csi-addons/spec)
 specification and can be used by any storage provider.

Volume Replication Operator follows controller pattern and provides
 extended APIs for storage disaster recovery.
 The extended APIs are provided via Custom Resource Definition (CRD).

 Rook v1.6.0 comes with the new volume replication support, and
 this can be enabled in the `rook-ceph-operator-config` configmap.

>:bulb: For more information, please refer to the
> [volume-replication-operator](https://github.com/csi-addons/volume-replication-operator).

### Deploy `csi-omap-generator` and `volume-replication` sidecars

To achieve RBD Mirroring, `csi-omap-generator` and `volume-replication`
 containers need to be deployed in the RBD provisioner pods.
Execute the following steps on each peer cluster to enable the
 OMap generator and Volume Replication sidecars:

* Edit the `rook-ceph-operator-config` configmap and add the
 following configurations

    ```bash

>     kubectl edit cm rook-ceph-operator-config  -nrook-ceph

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    kubectl edit cm rook-ceph-operator-config  -n rook-ceph
```

    ```

    Add the following configuration if not present

    ```yaml

>     apiVersion: v1

Reviewer: nit: no need for this line
```suggestion
```

    data:
      CSI_ENABLE_OMAP_GENERATOR: "true"
      CSI_ENABLE_VOLUME_REPLICATION: "true"
    ```

> * After successful execution of the above steps, two new sidecars

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* After updating the configmap with those settings, two new sidecars
```

>  should now come up in the CSI provisioner pod.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 should now start automatically in the CSI provisioner pod.
```

* Repeat the steps on the peer cluster.

> ## VolumeReplicationClass and VolumeReplication

Reviewer: Everything needs to be phrased in terms of understanding of what the users needs to do. So can we rephrase the title to describe what is happening in the section, something like this?
```suggestion
## Enable Volume Replication
```

> 

Reviewer: Can you provide a couple sentences that explains what they are doing in this section?

> ### VolumeReplicationClass

Reviewer: VolumeReplicationClass and VolumeReplication don't need titles IMO. They probably just need a sentence or two explaining their purpose, then continue with the example of what they're configuring in this section.

        schedulingStartTime: "16:18:43"
        replication.storage.openshift.io/replication-secret-name: rook-csi-rbd-provisioner
        replication.storage.openshift.io/replication-secret-namespace: rook-ceph
    EOF
    ```

>:bulb: **Note:** The `schedulingInterval` can be specified in formats of
> minutes, hours or days using suffix `m`,`h` and `d` respectively.
> The optional schedulingStartTime can be specified using the ISO 8601
> time format.

* Once VolumeReplicationClass is created, create a Volume Replication for
 the PVC which we intend to replicate to secondary cluster.

    ```yaml
    $cat <<EOF | kubectl --context=cluster-1 apply -f -
    apiVersion: replication.storage.openshift.io/v1alpha1
    kind: VolumeReplication
    metadata:
      name: pvc-volumereplication
    spec:
      volumeReplicationClass: rbd-volumereplicationclass
      replicationState: primary
      dataSource:
        apiGroup: ""
        kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
        name: rbd-pvc # Name of the PVC on which mirroring is to be enabled.
    EOF
    ```

>:memo: *VolumeReplication* is a namespace scoped object. Thus,
> it should be created in the same namespace as of PVC.

> `replicationState` is the state of the volume being referenced.

Reviewer: Maybe add a new section title like this?
```
## Checking Replication Status
```

To check VolumeReplication CR status:

```bash
kubectl get volumereplication pvc-volumereplication  --context=cluster-1 -oyaml
```

>```yaml
>...
>spec:
>  dataSource:
>    apiGroup: ""
>    kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
>    name: rbd-pvc
>  replicationState: primary
>  volumeReplicationClass: rbd-volumereplicationclass
>status:
>  conditions:
>  - lastTransitionTime: "2021-05-04T07:39:00Z"
>    message: ""
>    observedGeneration: 1
>    reason: Promoted
>    status: "True"
>    type: Completed
>  - lastTransitionTime: "2021-05-04T07:39:00Z"
>    message: ""
>    observedGeneration: 1
>    reason: Healthy
>    status: "False"
>    type: Degraded
>  - lastTransitionTime: "2021-05-04T07:39:00Z"
>    message: ""
>    observedGeneration: 1
>    reason: NotResyncing
>    status: "False"
>    type: Resyncing
>  lastCompletionTime: "2021-05-04T07:39:00Z"
>  lastStartTime: "2021-05-04T07:38:59Z"
>  message: volume is marked primary
>  observedGeneration: 1
>  state: Primary
>```

* Take a backup of PVC and PV object on primary cluster(cluster-1)

  * Take backup of the PVC `rbd-pvc`

    ```bash
    kubectl get pvc rbd-pvc -oyaml >pvc-backup.yaml
    ```

>   * Take a backup of the PV, corresponding to the PVC

Reviewer: Why do you need to take a backup of the PV?

Author: Since we create a static binding between the PVCs and the PVs on the secondary cluster, new PVs are not created there. The restored PV is then bound to the restored PVC.
